---
title: Beginning The LitReview
description: Notes on starting a series of posts about random things that, hopefully, won't be so random any longer!
date: 2016-03-21
tags: LitReview
---

I read a lot of things on the internet. I read about programming and tech.
culture. I read about intersectional politics and post-capitalist futures and
surviving in a capitalist society. I read about art, media, and the sociology
of everything in between. In essence, I read [think pieces and
more](http://cwervo.com/thoughts/2016/02/finding-good-reads.html). I'm trained
in both creative writing and computer science, and as this is primarily a
blogging project, I'm going to actually take the approach of the latter
discipline: a literature review! I'm stretching the scope of "literature" here
to include things we read in our every day lives: blogs, news articles, and
forum questions, as well as obscure, discipline specific works: papers, journal
articles, other ("actual") literature reviews, and essays.

What's been on my mind lately are future-of-work and programming culture, but
if I like the form of the lit. review I may try expanding this to a bunch of
other purviews: education, diversity,  programming languages, history of
science and philosophy, and culture.

I come across so many links every day, I only save a fraction of those I think
are worth reading, and a smaller fraction _of those_ I actually read. Still, to
process information this way is a real pain, because I develop ideas but then
never really have the time to digest new thoughts â€” how _does_ the relegation
of medieval culture to the "Dark Ages" speak to narratives of progress and
futurism? I don't know the whole scope of the answer to that question, indeed
people spend their lives trying to answer historical epistemological questions
like that, but if I can do anything with all my reading, it's to be able to
point people toward interesting things to think about.

You can read the articles I read, which I'll always link to, or just read my
excerpts and my commentary. However you like, I'll be trying to publish one a
month. [Here's the first one](/thoughts/2016/03/building-workplaces.html).
Enjoy!
