---
title: Tay and Race
description: Some thoughts on AI, race, and the difficulties within.
date: 2016-03-24
tags:
---

A pretty science fictional question for today: who has the responsibility for
[Tay] (https://twitter.com/TayandYou/) appropriating Black slang ([examples
here](https://twitter.com/search?q=fam%2C%20OR%20fleek%2C%20OR%20bae%20from%3Atayandyou&src=typd&lang=en))
and is it even accurate to call it appropriation. That is, is Tay a formal
intelligence co-opting language, or is she a mere textual reflection of
appropriative Twitter users? Does the distinction matter? Because, one might
say that all that distinguishes and adult from a toddler is that the former has
mastered the art of mimicking adults - this becomes a question of philosophy
and linguistics: what does it mean to mime, speak, communicate, and produce
ideas and can we cleanly separate these concepts? If we hope of classifying Tay
and similar intelligences under our old categories of understanding, we'd do
well to develop answers further.

Going beyond textual analysis, is it only appropriative because we don't
**conceive** of Tay as formally Black. What would we say to the project of
creating a Black teen artificial intelligence? Does it fail to qualify as
appropriation or racism at that point simply because we've assigned this
intelligence a race that signals centuries of historical context? Doesn't it
seem strange to assign a race to a theoretical intelligence when they would be
necessarily devoid of that historical context? The counter to that point is
that small children, too, lack the historocity of race, and of course we would
not argue that race is irrelevant to the young, even when they lack the
capacity to place their experience within human history. The stronger point,
then, is that an artificial intelligence like Tay lacks a body - thus, lacking
the melanin and skin, as well as the genetic, familial, and social rearing -
with which one would normally attach their race to.

Codifying race and race relations, to say nothing of gender, power, health,
class, or the million other potential strata, against the science fictional
reality of artificial intelligence - ones with a capacity to learn and
communicate - is difficult, and seems arbitrary and fraught until we agree on
how to even approach the issue of assigning race and dealing with what it means
to have language without a body or a personal history.
