---
title: One Writing The Word "Website"
description: A few short, messy thoughts on the way we write a single word.
date: 2015-11-11
tags: 
---

While reading [an
article](http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/race-and-the-free-speech-diversion?mbid=nl_151111_Daily&CNDID=11850649&spMailingID=8241555&spUserID=MjY0MzU4MzU1MjES1&spJobID=801069215&spReportId=ODAxMDY5MjE1S0)
on a decidedly different subject this morning, it struck me to read:

> The Foundation for Individual Rights in Education, a national campus
> free-speech organization, posted the video to their **Web site.**

I would encourage anyone to go read the original article — its topic,
particularly the way it discusses timely, critical issues is vital to the
safety of many marginalized voices on campuses today, particularly black
voices.  But, while I have a lot of opinions on trigger warning, safe spaces,
and threats to the lives of minority students on campuses across the US, that's
not what I'm commenting on today. I want to focus on the part I bolded above:
"Web site". There are three ways to write the word website (okay, there are
actually many, many ways to write "website" but I'll be simplifying for the
sake of time):

* Web site
* web site
* website

This isn't so much a fully formed thought, as it is an excuse to capture an
idea I had, so forgive the roughness. Nevertheless, let's try some vaguely
haughty linguistic analysis on a few of the different ways we can write this
phrase:

# "Web site"

This is the usage that I tend to see on most news sites. It
strikes me as a more conservative vision of what the Internet is. Simply going
off the grammar inherent in this writing, this turns the web into a proper
noun, denoted by the capitalization of "Web." Conceiving of the web as a proper
noun seems, to imply that the Internet is a single, knowable "thing," rather
than an amorphous collection of loosely related, maybe even completely
independent even, networks.

# "web site"

This writing is similar to the first, but loses the capitalization, which means
we've stopped conceptualizing the web as a single, proper noun. Still, breaking
the words "web" and "site" invokes a sort of separation between the two
entities. There's a relation, sure, that's implied by the use of the phrase
"web site", but keeping them separate words connotes that there is one "thing"
over there (the "web") and another, related but not exactly constituent, thing
over here (the "page").

# "website"

In the course of writing this, I realized that this is how I usually write the
word/ phrase. Maybe, at this point, I'm reading too much into things (as I
usually do), but writing it a compound word lessens the distinction between the
web and the page. In my head, and in the conceptualizations of the Internet
I've heard from some of my friends, we conceive of a website as contributing to,
not at all separate from, the "web" itself. Writing it this way (writing it
this way, even, without actually paying attention to it before I wrote this
thought out) seems to convey that idea.

This isn't anything ground breaking, just a feverish idea written down in a few
spare minutes, but I'd be happy to hear any thoughts you had reading this!
