---
title: Breaking Project Based Learning And The Concept Of Academic Disciplines
description: Explaining, and extending, the concept of antidisciplinary learning and how it relates to project based learning.
date: 2016-04-05
tags: education
---

I'm going to talk about how project based learning actually presents us with an
interesting problem post-high school, but to tell you about that, first I have
to tell you about this a word that comes from the MIT Media Lab: antidisciplinary.

The director of the Media Lab, Joi Ito, has a rough definition of the word:

> An antidisciplinary project isn't a sum of a bunch of disciplines but
> something entirely new - the word defies easy definition.

But, seeing as how "the word defies definition", maybe it'd be easier to
explain what the ethos of antidisciplinary education means in the context of
the educational journey. The Media Lab has [written
about](https://medium.com/mit-media-lab/mas-ambassadors-program-reaching-out-to-a-more-diverse-pool-of-students-1129406b1c01#.xg79n4j1s)
how they’ve struggled to explain and entice students of color to their graduate
program.  While this is the culmination of a lot of issues, I think one of the
biggest issues here is that it’s unclear what [anti
disciplinary](http://joi.ito.com/weblog/2014/10/02/antidisciplinar.html)
research even looks like, from an educational standpoint. So, for context,
let’s take a look at the journey of a young woman of color and see why, from
traditional educational frameworks, she’d be right to be confused, even scoff
at, the opportunity antidisciplinary work presents her.

This young woman takes the traditional route, she goes to school, she works
through K - 12, shines as a star, and attends an exceptional undergraduate
program. The entire time, she has been [socialized to be
perfect](https://medium.com/girls-who-code/teach-girls-bravery-not-perfection-257691d13476#.y4wslf1o1),
and to all outside extents, maybe she has been, maybe she’s gotten a 4.0, or a
5.0, all her life. Throughout this journey, she is socialized to believe that
math is math and can be applied to other fields. She is told art is a field
fundamentally different from science and that the task of merging them means
working in an entirely new framework, in an interdisciplinary approach. So,
when she first hears of the term, she reacts strangely to it. She understands
that, in an academic institution, research builds upon expertise, and that if
she wants to be an expert in her field, antidisciplinary approaches are great
for side projects, for outside work, but that research is research, something
constrained to a specific discipline, with proven results using a specific
methodology to arrive at a specific solution, or if the problem doesn't require
a solution, then the answer must fit a certain framework (think, the ways of
knowing that are codified in Philosophy, or Africana studies, or American
Studies). Or, maybe she doesn’t want to be an academic, maybe this young woman
of color wants to be a marketing professional, maybe she’ll be innovative
because, in her academic excellence, she has studied both design and
psychology, she sees an interdisciplinary pathway! I think this is where the
distinction between interdisciplinary and antidisciplinary becomes concrete: in
an interdisciplinary world, an interest in both these fields translates into
one narrow field: marketing. In an antidisciplinary, project based approach an
interest in these fields means working on projects that involve both these
things, it means interrogating the intersection of design and psychology until
there's a question that can be firmly answered.

What would a world look like that understood tackling antidisciplinary problems
as a matter of education? Well, for starters, it would be a world that
emphasized project based learning rather than assessment based. It would build
frameworks of knowing, classes of problems, and probably understand the
connections between solutions to these problems. A project based learning
pedagogy, from kindergarten through the graduate or professional world, would
yield a way of understanding practical solutions as a combination of skills and
approaches. The fundamental difference is that when a student only has
interdisciplinary learning as their options for breaking or crossing
disciplines, they see the world as two categories of problems: those academia
is suited to solve, and those academica needs to be bent, crossed, and
manipulated to understand and build solutions to.

Now, don’t get me wrong, in my view (I don't know what Joi Ito, or the Media
Lab for that matter, thinks) antidisciplinary learning isn’t against
disciplines (no matter what the name may imply): there’s great merit to
theoretical math, or biology research that only observes biological methods.
This is called basic science, or fundamental research, and it is the process
that has built many of our most interesting fields.  No, there’s basic,
groundbreaking work to be done within disciplines, and I'll readily acknowledge
that they might hold merit for as long as we decide academic institutions hold
merit. But, if we’re going to get work done in project based learning, and have
more for students to do in the end than just siloing away their efforts into a
specific field, we need to establish and understand and cultivate disciplinary
and antidisciplinary learning. Project based learning gives us a world of
opportunity, of making education relevant to kids again — can't we extend this
thinking to the college, graduate, and research level too? I believe the answer
is antidisciplinary learning, and I think the language of breaking academic
disciplines has a lot teach us.
