---
title: Making Data Meaningful
description: We have data visualization, but can't we do better than that?
date: 2016-04-06
tags: data visualization, UX
---

I'm taking a small class (an [ExCo](http://oberlinexco.org/)) right now about
data visualization. I'll be doing a private reading next semester doing data
visualizations. My creative writing capstone will be a data visualization comic
narrative, telling stories through a unique mix of data, words, and visual
patterns. Outside of myself, there's blogs, conferences, and entire companies
devoted to data visualization!

This is all well and good, and I'm really happy that we've begun to understand
that one answer to the Big Data problem is to understand what makes things
meaningful and understandable to humans and use those principles to make
visuals that put data into context (to me, through this lens, data
visualization is actually about and concerns the field of User Experience, UX).
But, I keep having this thought: can't we do better? Visuals are amazing, but
not only are they not accessible to those with vision issues, or people who
can't run the latest hardware to run your interactive narrative, but
visualizations only use one sense, don't take advantage of the full range of
human experience to understand data.

If we understand data quantification as a UX problem, then data visualization
is only one answer. To represent the weight of national debt, you could have an
interactive exhibit with various boxes of different weight representing the
national debt over time. Data sonification (using sound to represent aspects of
data) is a burgeoning technique, but still one that I haven't seen used very
much outside of [the occasional NASA video](the occasional NASA video). You
could use texture to make maps accessible to those without vision. You could
use a room full of sound clips, sped up, to narrate how the experience of a
city is different from living in a more rural area. You could turn data about
walking distances into an room that relates them, to scale, but makes them more
difficult to walk on (i.e. more erratically generated artificial terrain the
longer the distance). There's a world of sculpture, sound, taste, balance, or
smell, to explore!

I think we need to think about humanizing data as a project of data
quantification, not just visualization. This would make big data more
accessible, but that's not the only reason to look at it this way: data
quantification would make experiences a part of understanding data, would
remind us, by creating a new experience, that experiences, had and felt and
lived by real people, are what make data points so necessary to understand.
