---
title: How I Read More Than Just Thinkpieces
description: A rundown of what I do to find good pieces to read on the world wide web (okay, including a bunch of thinkpieces).
date: 2016-02-24
tags:
---

<style>
iframe#pocket-button-0 {
    width: 100px;
}
</style>

Before we begin: _don't have time to read this just now?_ How about you save this blog post in your Pocket using this button:
<a data-pocket-label="pocket" data-pocket-count="horizontal" class="pocket-btn" id="inline-pocket-button" data-lang="en"></a>
<script type="text/javascript">!function(d,i){if(!d.getElementById(i)){var j=d.createElement("script");j.id=i;j.src="https://widgets.getpocket.com/v1/j/btn.js?v=1";var w=d.getElementById(i);d.body.appendChild(j);}}(document,"pocket-btn-js");</script>
? ;)

Recently someone asked me:

> How do you find so many cool things to post to Facebook?

The most immediate answer I have is sort of obvious: **read what other people
are reading**. Okay, great, thanks -- but how do you go about doing that? Well, I have a
few things in mind, so here's a break down of how I keep finding interesting
things to read.

# [Pocket](http://www.getpocket.com/)

First, because I can't think of an elegant segway into this, here's an analogy.
If you want to read a lot of great books, you find and buy every great book you
can -- even with a significant backlog you can put them on a bookshelf and try
and whittle down the proverbial "unread stack" over the years (or, in my case,
just pile them into the corner and look over every once in a while at your sad
pile of neglected literary worlds). But, with digital content you don't have an
obvious bookshelf, except maybe your bookmark bar, but that quickly gets
unruly, and becomes a confusing mixed metaphor: are you bookmarking things for
quick and consistent access or just things to come back later; if you're using
a bookmarks bar for both purposes, how do you distinguish those? There a bunch
of solutions out there besides your bookmarks bar
([Instapaper](https://www.instapaper.com/) for example), but my personal
favorite is [Pocket](http://www.getpocket.com/). You can use the Pocket browser
extension to save interesting content that you come across randomly on your
computer, or the official Pocket apps to save things you find on your phone,
and even (as I'll come back to later) integrate it with various other apps to
save content right from inside other things (_note:_ this, is what I consider
the "secret", or rather my method, for finding and posting good content.)

# All The Newsletters

I don't even know how many newsletters I'm currently signed up for, but it's
definitely a lot. I don't actually read most of the newsletters except Jean
Hannah's beautiful [Thread](http://tinyletter.com/jeanhannah) and the morning
briefing from the New York Times. With the rest, I skim them and then look at
the link text, opening up the ones with interesting, fun, and/or engaging
content. Here are the newsletters I can remember I'm signed up to right now:

- [Happening](https://www.kickstarter.com/newsletters/happening)*
- [Clients From Hell](http://clientsfromhell.leadpages.co/leadbox/14649f773f72a2%3A10df9b858346dc/5653164804014080/?subdomain=clientsfromhell)
- The Vi and UX [StackExchange Newsletters](http://stackexchange.com/newsletters)
- [The UI Animation Newsletter](http://valhead.com/newsletter/)
- [Web Animation Weekly](http://rachelnabors.us1.list-manage.com/subscribe?u=0a8f219cf8284562f91a26ee9&id=d60f6683d2)
- [The Kids Should See This](http://thekidshouldseethis.com/)
- [The Medium UX Design Newsletter](https://medium.com/user-experience-design-1)

    \*The vast majority of the cool, random links I find come from this newsletter,
it's incredibly diverse and a lot of love and work is put into each one and it
shows.

After a while, with this and other newsletters, you start to amass a neat
backlog of interesting things to read.

# "Recommended" Reading

Before we move on to the other things I do that require slight effort to find
cool content, let's talk about the easiest way to find interesting things to
read: find something you really enjoyed reading (a human interest story, news
article, digital art peice, whatever). If it's a content focused website,
chances are they have a "recommended", "similar", or "related"
articles/stories/pieces section. Click on one or two of these, just click the
most interesting one. If that one doesn't seem as interesting as you thought,
click its recommended reading. You don't have to overdo it -- if you can't find
something realted and interesting to you after 3 or 4 clicks, the website
probably just isn't generating good content or might not be the best at
filtering and grouping content together well. It's a small thing, but I've
found a cool article or two this way for sure.

# OPS (an acronym I just made up for _Other People's Shares_)

This one's pretty simple too, but involves selling your soul to social media.
If you spend enough time scrolling through Twitter (I barely use Twitter as a
public presence platform like I do Facebook: I kill time by using it to find
interesting articles posted by the incredible people I follow who do use
Twitter well), your Facebook News Feed, or Reddit (I don't actually use Reddit,
at all, but it's a good option to keep in mind), you'll end up with a news and
article aggregate that you get to hand-pick. This method allows you to
intersect the things your friends and acquaintances like with your personal
interests, the best of both worlds maybe?

# Apppppppps

I spend a lot of time on my phone, so in addition to the official Pocket app,
I've taken the time to figure out what works with what, so here's a run down of
app options that integrate with Pocket so you can seemlessly save that danke web content:

- CloudMagic
    - This email app offers integration with Pocket so you can save newsletter links and other fun stuff right to Pocket.
- Twitter
    - Twitter has the ability to add a "Save to Pocket" button that comes in handy, I find a lot of awesome links whenever I'm just killing time scrolling through Twitter, so this has been a gold mine for my reading content.
- Email
    - Pocket gives you the ability to email links to a special email. If you don't have access to the app, the extension, or your phone, this is a great alternative in a pinch!
- IFTTT
    - Using "If This Then That", [IFTTT](http://ifttt.com/) for short, you can connect even more, like Todoist or Evernote.

# Okay, I'll Stop Rambling Now ...

As I finish this post up, I'm realizing this was basically just me endorsing
Pocket as a personal news aggregator. ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ Here's some actual, if still
vague advice: build a system (see [this Scott Adams blog
post](http://blog.dilbert.com/post/102964992706/goals-vs-systems) on why
systems, not goals, are important) to save content, read, and post content
and figure out your own personal news feeds: you News Feed (Facebook), Twitter,
the daily newspaper, a friend's random link-filled emails, etc. Whatever it is,
identify where you get your links from, put them somewhere, and take some time,
on occiasion, to work through your backlog. I've been doing this for maybe a
year and a half and I'm actually still figuring out how to make time to go
through my backlog (for reference, I have 1,720 things in my Pocket ... so,
there's that). Maybe I'll make another blog post once I get my life together
and can actually figure out a reading scheduling.
