---
title: In Our Real Lives - Reflections on “IRL”
layout: blog
---

The phrase “In Real Life” (most often abbreviated to IRL) is a strange
phrase right off the bat, right? A century ago, maybe even 50, 40, 30
years ago, it would have meant nothing. Lives were different, the were
diverse, they could be posh, disconnected, tragic - but as long as you
were alive, you were currently in real life. So first, what do we mean
when we say IRL?

As with a lot of interaction, meaning isn’t straightforward, it’s built
every time you speak to someone through the context surrounding the
conversation. On the Internet that’s a problem, because we don’t have
social cues to create context (hence the need for the invention of the
smiley face emoticon), so necessarily my interpretation of the meaning
behind IRL will be different from yours or anyone else reading this.

IRL denotes that in digital spaces we escape the “real world” - the
world of responsibility, traditional social interaction, maybe even
traditional social graces. It is more than mere escapism, it denotes a
complete separation of the reality that exists between digital
interaction and physical interaction.

Except, now, we’re coming full circle, and the phrase is once again
strange, but not for any of the reasons it would have been in the past.
Today, digital existence isn’t digital existence, for many people it
simply is their mode of existence. That is, there is no more artificial
life versus “real life” - that sense of escapism has engulfed
everything (software has eaten the world), making IRL an interesting
lexical anachronism.

It’s amazing how quickly digital meaning is changing, that in someone’s
lifetime (not mine, but someone’s) an entire phrase, three little
words, have gone from denoting an entire culture of digital awe a true
digital subculture, to denoting an artificial boundary in a world where
that subculture has engulfed the daily professional and personal lives
of billions around the world.

That’s to real life, all the time.
